#summary Installation documentation
#labels Featured,Installation,Configuration

= Installation =

[http://code.google.com/p/plosxom/downloads/list Download] the latest tarball of plosxom. Copy it to your webspace and unpack it

{{{
% tar xvfz plosxom-core-x.xx.tar.gz
}}}

Make sure your webserver is able to access all the files. Read permissions are sufficient.

= Configuration =

Next, edit the plosxom configuration file *etc/plosxom.conf*. Here is an explanation of the variables.


This is the physical location of the plosxom installation on the
filesystem.

*lib_path = /path/to/webspace/plosxom/lib*

Where are the templates located. This directory must be visible
to the webserver, because templates provide css stylesheets, which
are required.

*template_path = //path/to/webspaceplosxom/templates*

The directory where pre-compiled templates can be stored. Must
be writable for the webserver.

*tmp_path = /tmp*

Here are the postings stored. You can create subdirectories, which
will then considered as categories. Only files with a .txt extension
will be indexed. To hide a file from the blog, change its permissions
so that the webserver can't read it anymore. Consider this as
"draft posting" feature.

*data_path = /path/to/webspaceplosxom/data*

Where plugins are located.

*plugin_path = /path/to/webspace/plosxom/plugins*

The name of the template. Each template is a directory beneath
the template_path.

*template = default*

The overall name of your blog.

*blog_name = BLOGNAME*

Add a short description, a oneliner is far enogh.

*blog_title = BLOGDESCRIPTION*

The number of postings to be displayed on the blog front page.

*postings = 10*

Your name.

*author = yourname*

Add a link to your homepage or something which will be used to
underline the author name.

*author_link = http://yourpage/*

This is the http url of the plosxom blog.

*whoami = http://yourpage/plosxom/plosxom.php*

This is the base url of the blog, without the plosxom.php file.
Will be used to create image or stylesheet links.

*baseurl = http://yourpage/plosxom/*



= Posting =

Now you are done. Start blogging by creating txt files under the *data_path* directory. The first line will be used as the posting title.

= Plugins =

To install a plugin, download it from the [http://code.google.com/p/plosxom/wiki/Plugins Plugin] page. Copy the *.php* file to the *plugin_path* directory. If the plugin contains further installation instructions follow it precisely. That's it. Plugin will be loaded automatically by plosxom.

In most cases you'll have to add some code snippet to your template. How to do this will be documented in the plugin.

= Templates =

To install a template, download it from the [http://code.google.com/p/plosxom/wiki/Templates Templates] page. Uninstall the *.zip* file inside the *template_path* directory. This will create a new directory with the name of the template. Add this name to your configfile by replacing the variable *template* with it.

= Update =

To update your installation, go to the [http://code.google.com/p/plosxom/downloads/list Download] page and download the latest *patch* file. Unpack this patch in your plosxom directory. A patch tarball only contains the changed files and will not overwrite any configuration files or templates. If the default template has changed, a *.updated* file will be installed instead. You may then adjust your current template with the changes or just replace it with the new version.

= Problems =

If you encounter problems, file a [http://code.google.com/p/plosxom/issues/list Bugreport] if you think it is a bug.

Send me an email if you need help installing or configuring plosxom: *nobrain AT bk DOT ru*.

Or post questions or suggestions to the [http://groups.google.com/group/plosxom-discuss Forum].

= Thanks =

Thanks for using plosxom and keeping the opensource movement alive!