#summary Welcome to the plosxom project site
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

Plosxom is a blogsoftware written in PHP. It is a rewrite of [http://www.celsius1414.com/phposxom/ phposxom]. Blogposts are stored in textfiles, categories are simple directories. Plosxom has a comprehensive plugin api, which allows to add almost any functionality or to replace existing functionality.

= Details =

Phposxom were itself a php rewrite of [http://thesaurus.reference.com/go/http://www.blosxom.com/ blosxom], but the developer has abandoned the project. I am using it, because I cannot run perl where my site is hosted and because it is small. However, the sourcecode of phposxom were nearly unmaintanable, inefficient and bad styled (sorry Robert). Since I use it on an every day basis, I decided to completely rewrite it. Plosxom was born.

Many of the blosxom forks out there have been abandoned too, especially the php ports (there are lots of it). None of them seemed to be a usefull base for me. Most of them justify their decision that if it were developed further it would become too far to existing projects like wordpress and they didn't want to re-invent the wheel.

While I share this view in general, I also see a lot of disadvantages with wordpress: its storage backend can't be replaced. It depends on MySQL, which is the worst database system on the planet. With plosxom you could write a sqlite backend or whatever you like, even a mysql backend. Wordpress is also a "large biest", it contains a lot of source code and thus a lot of problems, especially from the security point of view.

Speaking of security - plosxom were developed with strong security in mind. Since there is almost no cgi input being used in the software, this goal were not difficult to achive. Everything which gets into the script will be filtered for bogus characters. Future attacks like are hopefully prevented using this technique.

There is no administration backend delivered with plosxom, because you write textfiles (or upload them), that's all. Without admin backend, the blog can't be hijacked like most other blogs could be.

The plosxom core engine is very small. In fact, I wrote it in just two days. This sounds like a hell of a crap, but it isn't. Much functionality is provided by plugins, even core functions, such as text file management, is coded as a plugin. Since we are using [http://thesaurus.reference.com/go/http://smarty.php.net/ smarty] as our template engine there are endless possibilities to enhance plosxom. You can write a simple plugin along with a simple smarty function and that's it.

For now, plosxom doesn't provide built-in comment support due to security reasons. Instead comments can be outsourced to [http://www.haloscan.com Haloscan]. However, perhaps someone will write a comment plugin some day, who knows.